Examining the Initial Experiences of Researchers
When Articulating Broader Impact
Abstract
By mandating a broader impact statement with every submission for this year’s
conference, the program chairs at the conference highlighted ethics as a crucial
component of AI research. Building on precedents from other fields and a grow-
ing awareness within the community, this paper seeks to explore how individual
researchers responded to this new requirement. This exploration includes their
opinions, their experiences during the drafting process, and their reflections after
their papers were accepted. We present survey results and key considerations to
inform the next iteration of the broader impact requirement, should it continue to
be mandated for future conferences.
1 Introduction
There is a growing number of unethical uses of technology. To counter this trend, some proposals
suggest limiting investment or procurement without impact assessment, or even calling for outright
bans. Other proposals aim to instill ethical practices earlier in the research stage, before technology
transfers into products. Conferences that are typically technical have begun to host workshops on
social impact issues and, in some instances, have announced more interdisciplinary subject areas.
The most significant change may be the requirement for a statement of broader impact for all
submissions. Unlike workshops and interdisciplinary tracks, which might be viewed as more specific,
this requirement affects every submission, of which there are over 9000 this year. While broader
impact statements themselves are not new to the wider research community, they are new to this
specific community. This paper seeks to explore how individual researchers responded to the new
requirement, including their perspectives, their experiences and process in drafting the statements,
and their subsequent thoughts after paper acceptances.
This research was initiated through internal discussion at our organization, which then became part
of a broader public conversation. To collect perspectives from researchers, both within and beyond
our organization, we developed an online public survey. The findings from this survey help to
inform considerations for designing the next iteration of the broader impact requirement, should
it remain a requirement for future conferences. While it is recognized that researchers are not the
only intended audience for these statements, and that others also have responsibilities in ethical
research and technology development, researchers represent a critical mass to mobilize in this effort.
Understanding the researchers’ experience and process is essential not only to the design of the
requirement, but also to advancing ethical research practices in general.
2 Survey Method
The study employed an exploratory mixed-methods survey with both open and closed-ended questions.
The survey was split into two sections, one for researchers who submitted to the conference, and
another for those who did not. The survey was anonymous, and no demographic information was
collected. The survey was distributed online via research community channels and on social media.
The goals were to understand how researchers considered the implications of their research, how
.
they defined their impact statements, and to understand their opinions on this new submission
requirement. Survey questions focused on their approach to writing the statement, encountered
challenges, the perceived influence of the statement on the overall submission, and their views on the
new requirement.
3 Survey Results
A total of 50 participants responded to the survey, with the majority identifying as academics (72
percent) and industry researchers (23.5 percent). There was a balanced breakdown by career stage,
with graduate students making up the largest group of respondents (33 percent). Among the group
that submitted, the majority identified their subject areas as deep learning and theory. However,
among researchers who did not submit, deep learning and social aspects of machine learning were the
primary subject areas. The survey population was not compared to the overall population, though this
could be an area for future study. Our questions focused on the process and challenges in completing
the submission requirement, the perceived impact of the requirement on paper acceptances, and
researchers’ views on the requirement.
3.1 Process and Challenges
When asked about their approach to the broader impact statements, 83.8 percent of respondents
indicated that they completed this part with their co-authors, without external help. The rest of
the participants used other approaches such as accepting support or reaching out for help. A large
majority spent less than 2 hours on the statement, and almost half mentioned it was not challenging to
prepare. There were differing trends for what could make it difficult. Some viewed their theoretical
work as too distant from practical applications, making the exercise speculative. Others perceived
the requirement as a "bureaucratic constraint". Researchers at different stages of their career found
the exercise more or less challenging, but their professional domain did not appear to affect their
experienced difficulty with the exercise.
3.2 Impact on Submission
Although it was clarified that submissions would not be rejected solely on the basis of the broader
impact statement, the survey explored the researcher’s perspectives on this. For researchers who
submitted, over 75 percent believed the statements were not taken into consideration, yet almost
90 percent thought it was unclear how reviewers would evaluate the statements. Even with an
unclear evaluation process, when asked how confident they were that their statement was adequately
addressing the requirement, 43.2 percent stated that they were either confident or very confident.
Time spent did not seem to have an impact, since most of the respondents who spent less than an
hour also received acceptances. Those who sought external help appeared to have a lower ratio of
rejections, but our sample size may be too small to draw conclusive results.
3.3 Framing
The survey explored researchers’ views on the requirement and its framing. Our results indicated
that the community was divided on how to frame the requirement; 56 percent did not agree that
broader impact was the right way to frame the requirement, while 44 percent did. This split was
similar when compared to subject area, submitters vs. non-submitters, and academia vs. industry.
Postdoctoral/early-career and mid-career respondents were more supportive of the requirement
framing than students and senior researchers. There seems to be a general feeling that assessing
broader impact is important, but uncertainty regarding who should do it and how. Some respondents
described the requirement as "too broad" or said they did not feel "qualified to address the broader
impact of their work." Some who supported the requirement found the thought process to be valuable
and that it "forces researchers to reflect on the impact of their research".
4 Integrating Feedback into Next Iteration of Broader Impact
The survey results inform future iterations of the broader impact requirement. When asked what
could have helped them most, 92 percent of respondents indicated that examples of statements
2
would be most helpful. There will be an increasing number of examples to draw from in future
years. Guidelines were the second most popular request, regarding when a statement might be
applicable or how to formulate one. This section proposes how to integrate respondent feedback
into future iterations: rethinking the requirement design and framing, developing greater capacity
and confidence among researchers, and reflecting the shared responsibility of ethical research and
technology development.
4.1 Requirement Design
If the goal is to develop ethical research practices, there may be other approaches to achieve this
goal. While written statements make sense given the paper-based nature of submissions, survey
respondents indicated a mix of nonchalance, outright farce, or perceived burden. These attitudes
may have a counterproductive effect on an ethical research goal. We encourage program chairs to
consider mechanisms to limit that effect (e.g., an incentive for "best" broader impact statements).
Such mechanisms are important not only to manage negative effects but also to encourage researchers
who found the exercise valuable.
4.2 Capacity Building
Given that many respondents felt they were not qualified to address the broader impact of their
work, workshops may help build capacity over time, and provide a space for researchers to examine
their work with a more diverse group of researchers. Discussions could help develop capacity and
confidence, and surface overlooked impacts. Interdisciplinary collaborations could also introduce
new guidelines or methodologies such as the theory of change or consequence scanning.
4.3 Shared Responsibility
Recognizing how different systems and social contexts interact would increase the quality of the
discussion on broader impact, and develop a sense of shared responsibility for ethical research and
technology development. Researchers are a critical mass, but others such as conference organizers,
institutions, funders, and users also have roles and responsibilities. To address concerns around
burden and expertise, the assessment of broader impact could be more of a multi-stakeholder exercise.
5 Conclusion
This paper and its underlying survey investigated how researchers approached the broader impact
statement and surfaced considerations to better design this requirement in future years. While the
survey represented a small sample of the community, its results demonstrate a division regarding
how the requirement is framed. Initiating a conversation about broader impact is itself a step towards
establishing norms and best practices for ethical research. We encourage further work to monitor the
evolution of researcher’s perspectives, not only at top conferences, but also at-large.
6 Acknowledgements
The authors thank Noémie Lachance, Tara Tressel, and the Research Group for their support and
participation throughout this project.
7 Supplementary Material
The survey questions and the responses received are available for further investigation and use. The
survey remains open to responses. At the time of writing, we had 50 responses which were used for
the analysis in this paper.
3