A Collaborative Painting Experience:
Human-Machine Interaction on Canvas
Abstract
We introduce a novel approach to human-machine interaction, framed as a pictorial
game where artists and a computer collaborate in iterative creative rounds. The
computer uses machine learning to partially complete the artwork at each stage,
projecting its additions directly onto the canvas, which the artists are then able to
modify or incorporate. This process encourages creative exploration and provokes
questions about the growing relationship between humans and machines.
1 Introduction
The ongoing technological advancements are reshaping human-machine interaction, providing new
tools for artistic creation while simultaneously prompting contemplation on their effects on human
creativity.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have demonstrated the creative abilities of neural networks,
producing aesthetically full paintings. However, in these instances, humans serve as either engineers
or curators. Our work introduces a new method of machine utilization, integrating it into the core of
human creative processes. While painting, this approach presents humans with different paths and
concepts for their artwork. This concept is approached through a unique interactive framework.
The artist duo Tina and Charly have previously investigated interaction through canvas art. To initiate
their creative work, they select a theme and depict it in dark colors on a white canvas. They then
start their game. At each round, using a vocabulary of strokes and symbols, Charly anticipates Tina’s
emotions and thoughts in red, before responding with green strokes on the painting. These rounds
continue until both artists reach an agreement on finishing the painting. The entire process unfolds in
silence, with the canvas serving as the sole medium of dialogue.
The purpose of our work is to introduce artificial intelligence as a third participant in Tina and
Charly’s dialogue. The AI initially captures a raw representation of the painting, then processes it to
partially complete the work in progress, which it projects back onto the canvas. The artists then have
the freedom to incorporate the machine’s suggestion in blue, a color that has not been assigned to
either player. The use of different colors allows for the analysis of each player’s contributions.
2 Methodology
The engineered system includes a camera and a projector connected to a computer on a support. At
each computer round, the system captures an image of the painting and analyzes it to extract the
canvas strokes. This pre-processing is made robust to changes in lighting, ensuring that the interaction
can be used seamlessly in any studio. These strokes then feed into a neural sketcher, which produces
new strokes to be added to the painting. Post-processing is used to project those additions back onto
the canvas.
The neural sketcher is a recurrent neural network, based on a recent improvement to the seminal work
of previous research. It is trained using a sequence of points and a channel encoding for stroke breaks.
The sketcher produces a similar series, which is then converted back into strokes on the original
.
painting. The network was trained using the QuickDraw data set, enabling it to create human-like
strokes. For integration with Tina and Charly’s style, the learning was refined using a sketch database
from previous paintings by the artists.
3 Discussion
The artists found the machine strokes to be surprising and suggestive of movements they would not
have made on their own. Some painters have previously expressed how unintended strokes can be
evocative. Our installation, where the machine projects completions without physically painting, and
the generative network capabilities, allows this to be explored. Furthermore, the ability to change
parameters, such as the learning data set, provides the artist with more control over their usage of the
machine.
Our interactive installation can be used by anyone and aims to raise awareness and initiate thought
about the interplay between humans and machines. This work highlights the need to make machines
human-friendly, while also acknowledging how technology changes human behaviors and routines.
Tina and Charly felt like they were interacting with a full-body system, which had been designed
to simulate human-like painting. They experienced the machine as sometimes restricting, hard to
understand, and sometimes magical. It infused new dimensions into the painting. The feeling that the
machine could be collaborative or limiting is an echo of the role of technologies in our daily lives.
From an outsider’s perspective, the machine changes their original painting style, both in the short
term artworks (as seen in Figure 2), and on their long-term body of work, inspiring their machine-free
paintings. Even though we have made the machine’s influence explicit with its blue contributions, the
interaction is not neutral.
4 Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Yana Hasson and Yann Labbé for coding insights, Erwan Kerdreux
for art history discussions, and Thomas Lartigue for general discussions.
2